



Network Working Group                                           S. Sahib
Internet-Draft                                            Brave Software
Intended status: Informational                              21 June 2021
Expires: 23 December 2021


           Use Cases and Requirements for IP Address Privacy
                    draft-ip-address-privacy-latest

Abstract

   This document provides an analysis of the current use cases, privacy
   implications of and privacy mitigations for leakage of IP addresses.
   It examines the issues with anti-fraud reputation systems that rely
   on IP addresses currently and captures requirements for proposed
   'replacement signals' from this analysis.  In addition, existing and
   under-development techniques are evaluated for fulfilling these
   requirements.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list (), which
   is archived at .

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ShivanKaul/draft-ip-address-privacy.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 23 December 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  IP address use cases
   3.  Privacy implications of IP addresses
   4.  Privacy mitigations for IP address leakage
   5.  Replacements for IP addresses
     5.1.  Reputation Systems
       5.1.1.  Terminology
       5.1.2.  Client requirements
       5.1.3.  Server requirements
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   *  An analysis of the current use cases, attempting to categorise/
      group such use cases where commonalities exist

   *  Generating requirements for proposed 'replacement signals' from
      this analysis (these could be different for each category/group of
      use cases)

   *  Research to evaluate existing technologies or propose new
      mechanisms for such signals

   *  Find ways to enhance the privacy of existing uses of IP addresses.

2.  IP address use cases

3.  Privacy implications of IP addresses

4.  Privacy mitigations for IP address leakage

5.  Replacements for IP addresses

5.1.  Reputation Systems

   IP addresses are currently used as a source of "reputation" in
   conjunction with other signals to protect against malicious traffic.
   Servers use these reputations in determining whether or not a given
   packet, connection, or flow corresponds to malicious traffic.  Tor
   exit nodes often have bad reputation because there exists some client
   sending bad traffic through the node.  Absent any sort of signal
   beyond the IP address, all connections through the exit node are
   assigned the same reputation.  Fundamentally, the current ecosystem
   operates by making the paths of a connection accountable for bad
   traffic, rather than the sources of the traffic itself.  This is
   problematic because paths are shared by multiple clients and are
   impermanent.  Ideally, clients could present proof of reputation that
   is separate from the IP address, and uniquely bound to a given
   connection.

5.1.1.  Terminology

   *  Reputation: A random variable with some distribution.  A
      reputation can either be "bad" or "good" with some probability
      according to the distribution.

   *  Reputation signal: A representative of a reputation.

   *  Reputation proof: A non-interactive zero knowledge proof of a
      reputation signal.

   *  Reputation context: The context in which a given reputation
      applies.

   *  Identity: Any identifying information about an end-user or
      service, be it a client or server, including IP addresses.

5.1.2.  Client requirements

   *  Clients MUST be able to request and present new reputation proofs
      on demand.

   *  A reputation signal MUST NOT be linkable to any identifying
      information for which the signal corresponds.

   *  Clients MUST be able to demonstrate good faith and improve
      reputation if needed.

   *  Clients MUST be able to dispute their reputation.

   *  Clients MUST be able to determine and verify the context in which
      a given reputation applies.

   *  Reputation signals MUST NOT remain valid indefinitely.  (Clients
      must obtain new reputation signals periodically.)

5.1.3.  Server requirements

   *  Reputation signals MUST be bound to a context, and MUST NOT be
      transferrable across contexts.

   *  Clients MUST NOT be able to transfer reputations.

   Original material from Matthew Finkel on the PEARG mailing list
   (https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/pearg/
   YbWZe6FtNMh9KkQrLMM3-dzbtjA/).

6.  Security Considerations

   TODO

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

Acknowledgments

   TODO

Author's Address

   Shivan Sahib
   Brave Software

   Email: shivankaulsahib@gmail.com
