



Network Working Group                                           S. Sahib
Internet-Draft                                            Brave Software
Intended status: Informational                              21 June 2021
Expires: 23 December 2021


                   IP Address Privacy Considerations
                    draft-ip-address-privacy-latest

Abstract

   This document provides an overview of privacy considerations related
   to user IP addresses.  It includes an analysis of some current use
   cases for tracking of user IP addresses, mainly in the context of
   anti-abuse.  It discusses the privacy issues associated with such
   tracking and provides input on mechanisms to improve the privacy of
   this existing model.  It then captures requirements for proposed
   'replacement signals' for IP addresses from this analysis.  In
   addition, existing and under-development techniques are evaluated for
   fulfilling these requirements.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list (), which
   is archived at .

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ShivanKaul/draft-ip-address-privacy.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 23 December 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  IP address tracking
     3.1.  IP address use cases
       3.1.1.  Anti-abuse
       3.1.2.  DDoS and Botnets
     3.2.  Privacy implications of IP addresses
     3.3.  Mitigations for IP address tracking
   4.  Replacement signals for IP addresses
     4.1.  Requirements
       4.1.1.  Client requirements
       4.1.2.  Server requirements
     4.2.  Evaluation of existing technologies
     4.3.  Potential new technologies
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   The initial intention of this draft is to capture an overview of the
   problem space and research on proposed solutions.  The draft is
   likely to evolve significantly over time and may well split into
   multiple drafts as content is added.

   Tracking of user IP addresses is common place on the Internet today,
   and is particularly widely used in the context of anti-abuse, e.g.
   anti-fraud, DDoS management child protection activities.  IP
   addresses are currently used as a source of "reputation" in
   conjunction with other signals to protect against malicious traffic,
   since they are a relatively stable identifier of the origin of a
   request.  Servers use these reputations in determining whether or not
   a given packet, connection, or flow corresponds to malicious traffic.

   However, identifying the activity of users based on IP addresses has
   clear privacy implications e.g. user fingerprinting and cross site
   identity linking.  Many technologies exist today to allow users to
   hide their IP address to avoid such tracking, e.g.  VPNs, Tor.
   Several new technologies are also emerging in the landscape e.g.
   Gnatcatcher, Apple Private Relay and Oblivious techologies (OHTTPS,
   ODoH).

   This draft attempts to capture the following aspects of the tension
   between valid use cases for user identification and the related
   privacy concerns including:

   *  An analysis of the current use cases, attempting to categorize/
      group such use cases where commonalities exist

   *  Find ways to enhance the privacy of existing uses of IP addresses.

   *  Generating requirements for proposed 'replacement signals' from
      this analysis (these could be different for each category/group of
      use cases)

   *  Research to evaluate existing technologies or propose new
      mechanisms for such signals

2.  Terminology

   (Work in progress)

   *  Reputation: A random variable with some distribution.  A
      reputation can either be "bad" or "good" with some probability
      according to the distribution.

   *  Reputation signal: A representative of a reputation.

   *  Reputation proof: A non-interactive zero knowledge proof of a
      reputation signal.

   *  Reputation context: The context in which a given reputation
      applies.

   *  Identity: Any identifying information about an end-user or
      service, be it a client or server, including IP addresses.

3.  IP address tracking

3.1.  IP address use cases

3.1.1.  Anti-abuse

   Account abuse, financial fraud, ad fraud, child abuse...

3.1.2.  DDoS and Botnets

3.2.  Privacy implications of IP addresses

3.3.  Mitigations for IP address tracking

4.  Replacement signals for IP addresses

   Fundamentally, the current ecosystem operates by making the paths of
   a connection accountable for bad traffic, rather than the sources of
   the traffic itself.  This is problematic because paths are shared by
   multiple clients and are impermanent.  Ideally, clients could present
   proof of reputation that is separate from the IP address, and
   uniquely bound to a given connection.

4.1.  Requirements

4.1.1.  Client requirements

   *  Clients MUST be able to request and present new reputation proofs
      on demand.

   *  A reputation signal MUST NOT be linkable to any identifying
      information for which the signal corresponds.

   *  Clients MUST be able to demonstrate good faith and improve
      reputation if needed.

   *  Clients MUST be able to dispute their reputation.

   *  Clients MUST be able to determine and verify the context in which
      a given reputation applies.

   *  Reputation signals MUST NOT remain valid indefinitely.  (Clients
      must obtain new reputation signals periodically.)

4.1.2.  Server requirements

   *  Reputation signals MUST be bound to a context, and MUST NOT be
      transferrable across contexts.

   *  Clients MUST NOT be able to transfer reputations.

4.2.  Evaluation of existing technologies

4.3.  Potential new technologies

5.  Security Considerations

   TODO

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

Acknowledgments

   TODO

Author's Address

   Shivan Sahib
   Brave Software

   Email: shivankaulsahib@gmail.com
